JUDY WOODRUFF: And to the
analysis of Shields and Brooks.
That's syndicated columnist
Mark Shields and New York
Times columnist David Brooks.
Welcome, gentlemen.
David is joining us from
the Rocky Mountains,
Aspen, Colorado.
So, let's start, both of you,
by talking about health care.
Mark, we just heard a little
while ago on the program
Senator Roy Blunt of Missouri
saying it's going to be hard,
he said, to get to 50 votes.
What are you hearing?
MARK SHIELDS: It's an
understatement by Senator Blunt,
a masterpiece of understatement.
Judy, never say never.
I think it's about
time to say never.
I mean, this is not
being put together.
Quite frankly, the motion to
proceed, not to get inside
baseball, but that's when the
majority leader -- means
bringing up a bill.
And I have never seen a motion
to proceed, which is just
asking that the bill be brought
up for debate, fail.
And Mitch McConnell's
reputation as an inside
player has taken a big hit.
But there is not -- there is
not majority on what to do.
And it's not there.
And I will just back to
one Republican has spoken
the absolute abject
truth on this subject.
And he said, "In the 25 years
I have served in the Congress,
Republicans have never, not
one time ever agreed
on a health care plan."
That was Speaker John
Boehner this year.
And I think it remains true.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David,
what are you picking up?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, I'm hearing
negative vibes, but not
quite as negative as Mark.
I still think there's a chance.
What you hear is frustration
over, one, it's hard
to take away a benefit
people have already
been given by law.
Two, the Republicans are
more ideologically divided
than they thought they were.
Three, it's very hard to pass
a bill without a White House.
And the president basically
ineffective here, and the
vice president barely more so.
And so they're trying
to do it without him.
And I think what they're
beginning to hear, as
the calls come in, is
that this is a proposal
that hits a lot of
Republicans really hard.
If you're a 60-year-old white
male in Ohio, this can be
devastating to you, both in the
coverage loss and in
the deductibles and the
out-of-pocket expenses,
so the calls are coming
into the offices.
And that's making
people skittish.
I think it's an uphill fight.
I don't think it's quite
as impossible maybe.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I was
struck, Mark, that Senator
Blunt was saying the
more the senators learn
about what's in here,
the harder it gets.
MARK SHIELDS: That's right.
Yes.
No, that's absolutely -- and
I would just add to it, Judy,
there is no public argument,
a case to be made for this.
Senator Blunt answered
your specific questions
well, but there is no --
there is not a rallying
cry for, whether it's
preexisting condition
or, you know, that
everybody's child can be
on until the age of 26.
The Obamacare, the
Affordable Care Act, they
could make a public case
for it, that everybody
is in, that rates
will not be higher.
There's none here.
And I think that's
a real problem.
David's point about there
is no political air cover
from the White House.
Quite the opposite.
I mean, the White House
has been a liability.
The president has been
unhelpful, uninformed,
and this morning tweeting,
let's repeal, which,
CBO, the Congressional Budget
Office, has a score on, would
put 26 million people uninsured
immediately, so, you
know, off of insurance.
So, this is not a
recipe for success.
JUDY WOODRUFF:
David, that's right.
I mean, the president did tweet
this morning, well, if they
can't agree, they should repeal
now and replace it later.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, it's the
definition of bad leadership.
He had a more sensible position
not too long ago, which is
you do both things at the same
time.
If you repeal in the
fantasy that you're going
to replace later, when
you can't replace now,
that's just not a realistic
way to make policy.
I think Senator Blunt made
a good point, that, we got
a piece of legislation.
If you can't agree on this,
there's not some mythical future
piece of legislation out there
that's going to pass.
The basic problem is
that this is a bill that
massively redistributes
wealth from the poor
to the rich.
And there are a lot of senators,
including Bob Corker of
Tennessee and Portman of Ohio
and Susan Collins of Maine,
who are just uncomfortable
with the level of upward
redistribution that
this bill entails.
And then there are other
senators on the right,
the Ted Cruzes, who
just want to get rid of
what they call
job-killing taxes.
And that's just a diverse party.
And McConnell is trying super
hard to find some formula
that will please both sides,
but it just may be an
unsolvable problem.
MARK SHIELDS: I will
just add one thing, Judy.
You had an interview earlier
this week with Senator John
Thune of South Dakota, ranking
Republican.
And you asked him about one
little mishap, which was that
Dean Heller, the most vulnerable
Republican incumbent in the
country, up in Nevada next
year, in the only state where
Republicans running for
reelection that Hillary
Clinton carried in
2016, expressed his own
reservations, misgivings,
doubts, opposition to the
bill as proposed last Friday.
And what happened?
Joining the state's governor,
who pointed out that the
rate of uninsured children in
the state had been cut by
one-half under Obamacare because
of the Medicaid extension.
And he back -- he hollered
backed at the governor,
at which point the
president's own political
action committee, staffed
by the president's own
political aides and
apparatchiks, organized
a $1 million, expressed attack
ad series on him, Heller,
which Senator Thune objected
to, that Senator
McConnell opposed.
This is the political equivalent
of coming down from the hills
and shooting the wounded.
And so they had to back off.
And so you talk about White
House-congressional relations.
I mean, this is just -- it's
more than counterproductive.
It's stupid.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You're right.
Senator Thune -- David,
Senator Thune's comment,
that wouldn't be a good
time to go after members
of your own party.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
Yes.
No, it's -- the relations are
-- it's interesting to watch
even the reactions to the tweets
and everything else.
They can't get
away from this guy.
And what's been interesting,
talking to members of Congress,
is, it would be one thing if
he would just sort of disappear,
but they have to spend so much
of their time just reacting.
And it's just very hard to make
policy, aside from the problem
of just making policy from
Capitol Hill, which is
difficult to start with.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, speaking
of the tweets, David, we have
seen some eyebrow-raisers.
We have heard some gasps.
But I guess the president's
tweet yesterday morning about
the "Morning Joe" MSNBC cable
hosts, Joe Scarborough and
Mika Brzezinski, where the
president tweeted very personal
insults, low I.Q.,
face-lift, and so forth, it
seemed to reach a new low.
Do we learn anything new about
this president at this point?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, one of the
nice things, if we can find a
silver lining here, is, it's
possible for everybody
to be freshly appalled,
that we are not inured
to savage, misogynistic
behavior of this sort.
And I saw a lot
of people around.
And I certainly felt in
myself a freshness, a
freshness of outrage.
And I must say, when I hear
Roy Blunt say it's unhelpful
to himself, well, that's true,
but it's more than
unhelpful to Donald Trump
to tweet in this way.
It's morally objectionable.
And I do wish more
senators would say that.
Lindsey Graham and Ben
Sasse have said it, but
a lot of others, oh,
it's just not helpful.
It's more than that.
And the issue here is the
corruption of our public sphere.
And that's what Donald Trump
does with these things.
And it makes it harder for us,
our country, to ever get back
to normal, when these things
are corrosive to just the way
people talk to each other.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Corruption
of the public sphere, Mark.
MARK SHIELDS: I think David
is guilty of understatement.
No, I think he put it very well.
This is hateful
and it's hurtful.
Judy, I don't know what
a parent or a grandparent
is supposed to say to a
10-year-old or a 12-year-old
who said anything comparable to
this and was sent -- banished
to their room or whatever
else for it, I mean, that the
president of the United States
can talk this way, and there
are no consequences.
The irony is that he's more
engaged on the back-and-forth
with Joe Scarborough and Mika
Brzezinski on this than
he has been on health
care or any other issue.
He obviously -- this
is what matters to him.
And it's just that classic
-- not to be sectionally
biased, but it's sort
of a New York bully
approach to life, I mean,
that you say anything,
you do anything, because
the important thing
is winning.
And I just -- you know, I
don't know what else there is
to say, other than you want
to put yourself through a
car wash after you listen to
the president talk this way.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Are there
consequences, David?
I mean, I heard what you
said about some senators
are just saying, well,
it's not helpful, but
other senators are going
further and saying,
this is really wrong.
But are there ever consequences?
Do we just go on like this?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
Well, we will see if
people eventually get
disappointed and get tired.
I do think if it -- one of the
things that may begin to offend
people is potential mafioso
behavior.
One of the things we heard
this morning in the op-ed
piece in The Washington Post by
the two hosts was that the
White House sort of threatened
sort of extortion, that, if
the show becomes more
Trump-friendly, then
a National Enquirer
investigation into their
relationship will be spiked.
And that's sort of mafioso,
extortion behavior.
That's beyond normal
White House behavior.
It's beyond political hardball.
It's sort of using your media
allies, The National Enquirer
and the Trump administration,
to take down enemies.
And that's not something we
have seen in America since
maybe Nixon, or maybe never.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's true,
Mark, we haven't seen
anything like this in a while.
MARK SHIELDS: We haven't.
But I think David's
point about extortion
certainly strengthens
the position of James
Comey, that threats
and extortion or a hint
of extortion is part
of the modus operandi.
To Republicans...
JUDY WOODRUFF: I mean,
we should say the White
House is denying it.
MARK SHIELDS: The White
Jared Kushner, I guess, is
denying it, or perhaps somebody
else through him is denying
it.
But the fact that there's
negotiations going back
and forth or communications
on this subject,
you do this and we won't print
an injurious and harmful article
in The National Enquirer,
one of the great
publications of our time.
But, Judy, I remember
when Republicans used
to get upset and angry
at Bill Clinton because
he didn't wear a suit and
tie in the Oval Office.
And Donald Trump, who
is supposed to be this
great deal-maker, I mean,
Joe and Mika Brzezinski
have a morning show which is a
show that watched very much in
this area, but it doesn't have
a great national
audience, and probably 1
percent of the people.
And he just made them a
national -- everybody now
knows about this show.
It's probably increased their
ratings, juiced them up.
So I don't understand
where -- if anything,
it's but counterproductive
in every sense.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it is true,
David, that this is -- it's
hard to find you said there
may be a silver lining in
fresh outrage, but beyond
that, I'm not sure where it is.
DAVID BROOKS: No.
And, you know, the big question
for me is, do we snapback?
Do the norms that used to govern
politics reestablish themselves
after the Trump administration,
or are we here forever?
And I hope, from the
level of outrage, that
we have a snap back.
But the politics is
broken up and down.
And Trump may emerge from a
reality TV world that is much
more powerful than we think.
And there is the prospect
that this is where we are,
which is an horrific thought.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Horrific thought.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, it is that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark Shields,
David Brooks, we thank you both.
MARK SHIELDS: Thank you, Judy.